<div class=”entry-meta”><a class=”entry-date published”>October 14, 2017</a></div>

<body>Nobody knew what came over her. Unprovoked, The New Yorker's staff writer and dance critic Joan Acocella piped up with an abrupt rebuke of the prize-giving decisions recently made for the 2017 Praemium Imperiale - Japan's answer to Sweden's Nobel Prize.

"This award is political," said Acocella, the dean of American dance criticism and author of a critical biography of the choreographer Mark Morris and editor of Vaslav Nijinsky's unexpurgated ballet diary. During the audience q&a, Acocella flung her remarks from a second-row orchestra seat inside the Juilliard School's Paul Recital Hall in New York.

"I don't believe that your committee has ever had no politics," she added, microphone in right hand. She had directed her criticism at a US banker, a media mogul and a former cultural diplomat, all of whom could lay claim that they have spent good time trying to institutionally represent many cultural worlds.
<p>
<b>Breaching the decorum of cultural diplomacy</b>
Praemium Imperiale events tend to be stiff and dignified affairs. The September 2017 occasion consisted of a heavily diplomatic gathering and a celebratory luncheon.  Praemium Imperiale, a global super-prize bestowed yearly since 1989, promotes itself as the Japanese royalty's riposte to The Nobel Prize. Where the two differ has to do with the former's booty-like recognition of achievements in painting, sculpture, architecture, music, and theatre/film. These are categories not recognized by the Nobel's Swedish Academy. This year's laureates are legendary dancer and Hollywood film actor Mikhail Baryshnikov, world music star Youssou N'Dour, architect Rafael Moneo, visual artist Shirin Neshat and sculptor El Anatsui.

The bull's eye, if you can make it to the regale ceremonies, takes place a month in Tokyo where the five honorees are all but practically crowned in an imperial banquet and formal ceremony held at the former imperial palace of Meiji the Great).

The winners, as can clearly gleaned, are always heavyweights - the frequently endorsed "greatest" figures in the field of artistic endeavors whom the Swedish and the Norwegian academies of The Nobel Prize fail to recognize.

Who make up the nominators every year? Their identities are obviously kept in close wraps of anonymity. Yet the prize's international advisers and big-name recommenders, when publicly named and promoted in the press, impress us with their dizzying pedigrees. Billionaire businessmen, presidents or prime ministers of nations, leading Western economists, moneyed philanthropists and art-bitten bureaucrats chair six selection committees.

Since the mega-prize came to be in 1988, Japan's Yasuhiro Nakasone, Germany's Klaus-Dieter Lehmann, U.K.'s parliamentarian Chris Patten, Italy's Lamberto Dini and France's Jean-Pierre Raffarin have been deemed qualified experts. 

Update: Caroline Kennedy, thanks to being a former US Ambassador to Japan, accepted in 2018 the position of an international advisor. She took over for former U.S. Ambassador William Luers as lead presider of the U.S. nomination committee. Luers, a former President of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, had hogged this chair for 18 years since 2001. He transitioned to becoming an honorary advisor. 


The Economics of Awards
The room fell briefly silent after Acocella voiced her suspicions. A leader of an overseas press group whispered afterwards that he would privately talk to the prize committee's leaders to discern their real feelings about Acocella's needling remarks. She had made everyone uneasy by raising an unspoken dictate-a lingering doubt?-about the true and exact nature of Praemium Imperiale decisions made. She was alerting those followers and insiders who might have suspected (or might have been motivated by) the hidden workings of today's prize-giving economics.

Looking rankled from behind the podium was her target, the event's august host was U.S. Ambassador William Luers, himself the first son of a legendary business tycoon and a former president of both Metropolitan Museum of Art and the United Nations Association.

"It's a fair question" Luers replied. "We live in a world that is constantly changing. In this country, we have politics and divisiveness.

Acocella's breach of decorum took many attendees by surprise. Nobody understood what came over her. Since she herself is writing a biography of this year's film and theater laureate, why would she object? If anything, the publicists hoped that her Baryshnikov connection might result in a writeup in The New Yorker. Her criticism had broken the spell cast by the African Youssou N'Dour's soulful tenor voice during his a cappella singing of a traditional Senegalese mbalax, which punctuated the afternoon.

The winners are always heavyweights - the frequently endorsed "greatest" figures in the field of artistic endeavors whom the Swedish and the Norwegian academies of The Nobel Prize fail to recognize.

To Ambassador Luers' immediate right were the U.S. banker and philanthropist David Rockefeller Jr. as well as Hisashi Hieda, the Japanese television CEO of Fuji Media Holdings who is a TV broadcasting ally of Japanese royalty. The late David Rockefeller Sr. had championed Praemium Imperiale from the very beginning. Hieda praised Rockefeller Jr. for following his father's footsteps and assuming the role of a U.S. honorary adviser for the award.

"We witnessed the transformation of Japan through the prism of this prestigious, unique (at that time) new prize," Rockefeller Jr. said, tracing the award's place within Japan's broader historical context. "As we struggle to adapt to a world in which impersonal communication assumes greater prominence, this prize remains an enduring expression of our collective values."

What The Nobel Prizes ignore
Typically, announcements of award winners are made in cities around the world, but every five years one city is asked to host a main event. The five cities are New York, London, Paris, Berlin and Rome. Each city announces the five laureates every year, but these affairs are not of the same scale as the lavish event which is what took place at the Juilliard School in September. Each city announces the five laureates every year, but these affairs are not of the same scale as the lavish event which is what took place at the Juilliard School in September.

The bull's eye, if you can make it to the regale ceremonies, takes place a month later in Tokyo where the five honorees are all but practically crowned in an imperial banquet and formal ceremony held at the former palace of Meiji (or Meiji the Great). He was also known as Matsuhito, the first emperor of modernized Japan and the 122nd Emperor of Japan according to the traditional order of succession.

Youssou N'Dour and El Anatsui are the first artists from Senegal and Ghana, respectively, and Shirin Neshat the first Iranian woman, to receive the Praemium Imperiale from Japan.

On October 18, His Imperial Highness Prince Hitachi (brother of Emperor Akihito) and his wife Princess Hanako will pay ceremonial homage to Baryshnikov, N'Dour, Moneo, Neshat and El Anatsui. Each will receive a specially-designed gold medal, a testimonial letter from the Prince, and a check for 15 million yen (U.S. $136,000).

Hisashi Hieda's Fuji Media Holdings (not the state government nor the Japanese royalty) provides virtually all of the money to support the Praemium Imperiale prizes, including total expenses estimated at around $3 to $4 million per year. Interestingly, the award's claim to legitimacy and prestige arises from its being deeply interwoven with international circuits of economic, political and social power. During this year's announcement Hieda affirmed those roots when he dropped the names of Jacques Chirac, Helmut Schmidt, Klaus-Dieter Lehmann and former Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone - all of whom have been advisers, honorary or otherwise.

"I've served on many awards committees," The New Yorker dance critic Joan Acocella insisted, "and there have always been politics. I assure you."

Crucially, Hieda paid emphasis on the depoliticized mission and global process by which the selection of Praemium Imperiale winners are made. He spoke of the significance of the prize's six nomination committees, each chaired by an international advisor. The committees propose candidates in five fields with theater and film mashed together. 

In addition to establishing the prize, the Japan Art Association and its Ueno Royal Museum trace their roots direct to Nobuhito, Prince Takamatsu, a younger brother of Japanese Emperor Hirohito who argued for moderation during World War II. Japan Art Association gives an annual grant of 5 million yen to a group or institution that encourages the involvement of young people in the arts.

N'Dour and Anatsui are the first artists from Senegal and Ghana, respectively, and Neshat the first Iranian woman, to receive the Praemium Imperiale. Ambassador Luers then presented a grant of 5 million yen (about $45,000) grant to the Lebanon's Zoukak Theatre Company. The group's leader Lebanese actress Maya Zbib spoke about working in schools with displaced children and with women from the south of Lebanon.

"We are constantly struggling as a committee to make sure we are not selecting just people who are popular in New York or popular in the United States or popular on TV," said US Ambassador. 

"What committee would you get that did not believe that?"
Put on the defensive, former U.S. Ambassador William Luers told Joan Acocella: "Our committee is a nominating committee. It meets regularly every year whenever we make our recommendations. Most of the members are white males. Not all. There are several females; there are people of color. Most of them probably have a more liberal bias politically in this country, as you find throughout the arts."

She shot back: "I've served on many awards committees, and there have always been politics. I assure you."

"But in terms of how we make our decisions," he continued, "I do believe that our decisions are based on the most qualified people we think across this vast world have distinguished themselves through the quality of their art."

"Committees always believe that," Acocella lobbed back, with a laugh. Its sounded insisting.

"Well" - Luers took a breath then a quick pause - "what committee would you get that did not believe that?"

"I do believe that they are giving awards on the basis of good art," she said. "You know there is a lot of good art around. But I believe that Ms. Zbib's Zoukak theater group would not be given this award 10 years ago."

"Well, I don't know. Maybe you're right. You think it is a political award?"

"No, I'm not saying it is a political award in the sense that it is a wrong award."

Gathering forces, Luers interrupted her: "So many institutions are collapsing particularly in the Middle East. The fact that Maya's organization is a voice about coming together in a region that is falling apart - is maybe political, and maybe they would not have gotten it before. But the fact is we are in a different world now than we were 10 years ago. Where we are today is for political reasons."

"Bless you," Acocella said, as if to clear the unease and tension. "Go forward."

"Good."

"I just wanted to…. I don't have a question. I just wanted to make a comment."

"You made it. We appreciate it. You did provoke good thought for our committee."

Applause followed. More picture-taking. A grant money check of 5 million floated from one hand to another. Before everybody dined at the luncheon held on the Juilliard School's open-aired foyer, Ambassador Luers threw further light on what had happened.

He said, "We continue to find dynamic, original and important arts groups working anywhere. We are constantly struggling as a committee to make sure we are not selecting just people who are popular in New York or popular in the United States or popular on TV. We are constantly in search of finding a way to expand who it is that is most qualified in the world to receive this distinguished award."</body>
